README.md, before:

# 🏃‍♂️ Virtual Trail Run

A free, web-based treadmill workout app that streams scenic YouTube videos and tracks your movement using AI-powered head tracking. Similar to iFit or BitGym, but completely free and runs in your browser!

## ✨ Features

### 🎥 Video Workouts
- Stream scenic trail videos from YouTube
- Full-screen support for immersive experience
- Multiple terrain options: mountain, forest, beach, urban

### 📹 AI Head Tracking
- Uses your device's front camera to track movement
- Detects head "bobs" to measure your workout intensity
- Real-time feedback with visual overlay
- Privacy-first: all processing happens locally in your browser

### 📊 Workout Metrics
- **Bobs**: Total head movement counts
- **Bobs/min**: Current intensity level
- **Distance**: Estimated miles covered
- **Time**: Active workout duration
- **Movement**: Vertical movement indicator

### 👤 User Accounts
- **Guest Mode**: Use immediately without signing up (local storage only)
- **Account Mode**: Create account to save workouts and track progress
- Email/password authentication with password reset

### 📈 Analytics & History
- Track workout sessions automatically
- Monitor new vs returning visitors
- Save workout history (account required)
- Cost-optimized with smart caching

## 🎯 Project Status

**Current Version:** v1.0 (Production Ready with Firebase Integration)

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Try It Now (Guest Mode)
1. Visit the app
2. Click "Continue as Guest"
3. Select a video
4. Click "Start Workout"
5. Allow camera access
6. Start walking/running on your treadmill!

### Create an Account
1. Click "Log In / Sign Up"
2. Switch to "Sign Up" tab
3. Enter your details
4. Start tracking your progress!

## 🛠️ Technology Stack

- **Frontend**: Vanilla JavaScript, HTML5, CSS3
- **Video**: YouTube IFrame API
- **AI/ML**: TensorFlow.js 4.11.0 + MediaPipe Face Mesh
- **Camera**: WebRTC getUserMedia API
- **Backend**: Firebase (Firestore, Auth, Analytics, Hosting)
- **Caching**: LocalStorage with TTL expiration

## 📱 Device Compatibility

### Desktop
- ✅ Chrome, Edge, Firefox (latest)
- ✅ Safari 14+
- ⚠️ Requires webcam for head tracking

### Mobile
- ✅ iPhone (iOS 14+) - Safari or Chrome
- ✅ Android (8+) - Chrome
- ⚠️ HTTPS required for camera access

### Tablet
- ✅ iPad (iPadOS 14+)
- ✅ Android tablets
- 💡 Recommended: mount in portrait mode on treadmill

## 💰 Pricing

**100% FREE!** No subscriptions, no ads, no tracking.

- Guest mode: Completely free, no sign-up
- Account mode: Free with workout history
- No credit card ever required

**Why free?**
- Firebase free tier covers small usage
- Optimized caching reduces costs
- Guest mode uses only local storage
- Open source philosophy

**Cost optimizations:**
- Smart caching (60-80% read reduction)
- Event batching (90% write reduction)  
- Offline persistence
- Estimated: $0/month for 0-5K users

### Installation

1. **Clone or download this repository**
   ```bash
   cd d:\src\virtualTrailRun
   ```

2. **Open in browser**
   - Simply open `index.html` in your web browser
   - OR use a local web server (recommended for testing):
   
   **Using Python:**
   ```bash
   python -m http.server 8000
   # Then open http://localhost:8000
   ```
   
   **Using Node.js (with http-server):**
   ```bash
   npx http-server -p 8000
   # Then open http://localhost:8000
   ```
   
   **Using VS Code:**
   - Install "Live Server" extension
   - Right-click on `index.html` and select "Open with Live Server"

3. **Allow camera permissions** when prompted by your browser

## 📱 Usage

1. **Choose Your Trail**: Click on one of the preset scenic video options
2. **Start Workout**: Click the "🎥 Start Workout" button to begin video playback
3. **Enable Camera**: Click "📹 Enable Camera" to activate head tracking
4. **Start Moving**: Begin walking or running on your treadmill
5. **Monitor Stats**: Watch your head movement stats update in real-time

### Controls
- **Fullscreen Video**: Click the fullscreen button to expand the video
- **Reset Stats**: Clear all workout statistics
- **Switch Videos**: Select different trail videos during your workout

## 🏗️ Technical Architecture

### Technology Stack

#### Frontend Framework
- **Vanilla JavaScript**: No framework dependencies for maximum compatibility
- **HTML5 Canvas**: For rendering face tracking overlay
- **CSS3**: Responsive design with CSS Grid and Flexbox

#### Key Libraries
- **YouTube IFrame API**: Video playback and control
- **TensorFlow.js**: Machine learning framework
- **MediaPipe Face Mesh**: High-fidelity face landmark detection (468 3D landmarks)
- **WebRTC**: Camera access via `getUserMedia` API

### File Structure
```
virtualTrailRun/
├── index.html          # Main HTML structure
├── styles.css          # All styling and responsive design
├── app.js              # Main application controller
├── videoPlayer.js      # YouTube player integration
├── headTracker.js      # Head tracking and face detection
└── README.md          # This file
```

### How It Works

#### Video Streaming
The app uses the YouTube IFrame Player API to embed videos directly in the page. The player supports:
- Full-screen playback on mobile devices
- Programmatic control (play, pause, seek)
- Event handling for playback state changes

#### Head Tracking
The head tracking system works in several steps:

1. **Camera Access**: Uses WebRTC `getUserMedia` API to access the front-facing camera
2. **Face Detection**: TensorFlow.js with MediaPipe Face Mesh detects facial landmarks
3. **Position Tracking**: Monitors the nose tip position (landmark #1) for vertical movement
4. **Bob Detection**: Identifies complete up-down or down-up motion cycles
5. **Statistics**: Calculates bobs per minute by tracking timestamps

**Key Tracking Metrics:**
- **Vertical Movement**: Real-time vertical displacement in pixels
- **Bob Count**: Total number of complete head bobbing cycles
- **Bobs Per Minute**: Intensity metric calculated from recent bob timestamps

## 🔧 Customization

### Adding New Videos

Edit the video selection buttons in `index.html`:

```html
<button class="video-option" data-video-id="YOUR_VIDEO_ID">
    🏔️ Your Video Title
</button>
```

Replace `YOUR_VIDEO_ID` with any YouTube video ID.

### Adjusting Tracking Sensitivity

In `headTracker.js`, modify these parameters:

```javascript
this.bobThreshold = 5;           // Minimum movement to count as a bob
this.maxHistoryLength = 30;      // Number of frames to track
```

### Styling

All styles are in `styles.css` with CSS custom properties for easy theming:

```css
:root {
    --primary-color: #2563eb;
    --secondary-color: #10b981;
    /* ... more variables ... */
}
```

## 📊 Browser Compatibility

| Feature | Chrome | Safari | Firefox | Edge |
|---------|--------|--------|---------|------|
| YouTube IFrame API | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| WebRTC Camera | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| TensorFlow.js | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| MediaPipe | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| Fullscreen API | ✅ | ⚠️* | ✅ | ✅ |

*Safari on iOS has some fullscreen limitations in web apps

### Mobile Testing
- **iOS Safari**: Works well, but requires user interaction before camera access
- **Android Chrome**: Full functionality with excellent performance
- **iPad/Tablet**: Optimal experience with larger screen

## ⚠️ Known Limitations

### Current POC Limitations
1. **Performance**: Running video + camera + ML simultaneously is resource-intensive
2. **Battery Drain**: Continuous camera use drains battery quickly
3. **Background Processing**: Mobile browsers limit background tasks
4. **Fullscreen + Camera**: Some browsers restrict camera access in fullscreen mode
5. **Accuracy**: Head tracking works best with good lighting and clear face visibility

### Web App vs Native App Trade-offs

**Web App Advantages:**
- ✅ No installation required
- ✅ Cross-platform (iOS, Android, Desktop)
- ✅ Easier updates
- ✅ Lower development cost

**Native App Advantages:**
- ✅ Better performance optimization
- ✅ More reliable camera access
- ✅ Background execution
- ✅ App store presence
- ✅ Offline capabilities
- ✅ Better battery management

## 🎓 Learning Resources

- [YouTube IFrame API Documentation](https://developers.google.com/youtube/iframe_api_reference)
- [TensorFlow.js Face Landmarks Detection](https://github.com/tensorflow/tfjs-models/tree/master/face-landmarks-detection)
- [MediaPipe Face Mesh](https://google.github.io/mediapipe/solutions/face_mesh.html)
- [WebRTC getUserMedia](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/MediaDevices/getUserMedia)

## 🚀 Next Steps

### For Development
1. **Test on actual devices**: Try the app on various phones and tablets
2. **Measure performance**: Use Chrome DevTools to profile CPU/memory usage
3. **User testing**: Get feedback from actual treadmill users
4. **Optimize tracking**: Fine-tune bob detection parameters

### Migration to Production
If this POC is successful, consider:

1. **Progressive Web App (PWA)**: Add service worker for offline support
2. **Capacitor/Cordova**: Wrap as native app if needed
3. **React Native**: For fully native performance with shared codebase
4. **Backend Integration**: Add user accounts, workout history, etc.

## 🤝 Contributing

This is a proof-of-concept project. Feel free to:
- Fork and experiment
- Report issues
- Suggest improvements
- Share your findings

## 📄 License

This is an educational proof-of-concept project. Use freely for learning and evaluation.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- YouTube for the IFrame API
- TensorFlow.js team for the ML framework
- Google MediaPipe for face detection models
- All the content creators whose trail videos make this possible

---

**Built with ❤️ as a technical feasibility study**

*Last Updated: December 30, 2025*

Commit message:

Update README with collectibles game feature

README.md, after:

# 🏃‍♂️ Virtual Trail Run

A free, web-based treadmill workout app that streams scenic YouTube videos and tracks your movement using AI-powered head tracking. Similar to iFit or BitGym, but completely free and runs in your browser!

## ✨ Features

### 🎥 Video Workouts
- Stream scenic trail videos from YouTube
- Full-screen support for immersive experience
- Multiple terrain options: mountain, forest, beach, urban

### 📹 AI Head Tracking
- Uses your device's front camera to track movement
- Detects head "bobs" to measure your workout intensity
- Real-time feedback with visual overlay
- Privacy-first: all processing happens locally in your browser

### 🎮 Gamification - Collectibles
- **Trail Objects**: Acorns, mushrooms, pinecones, leaves, and stones randomly appear on the trail
- **Hand Gesture Detection**: Make a grabbing gesture (close your fist) to collect items
- **Score Counter**: Track your collectibles in the upper-left corner
- **Perspective Effect**: Objects start small and grow larger as you "approach" them
- **Fun Feedback**: Visual animations when you successfully grab an item

### 📊 Workout Metrics
- **Bobs**: Total head movement counts
- **Bobs/min**: Current intensity level
- **Distance**: Estimated miles covered
- **Time**: Active workout duration
- **Movement**: Vertical movement indicator

### 👤 User Accounts
- **Guest Mode**: Use immediately without signing up (local storage only)
- **Account Mode**: Create account to save workouts and track progress
- Email/password authentication with password reset

### 📈 Analytics & History
- Track workout sessions automatically
- Monitor new vs returning visitors
- Save workout history (account required)
- Cost-optimized with smart caching

## 🎯 Project Status

**Current Version:** v1.0 (Production Ready with Firebase Integration)

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Try It Now (Guest Mode)
1. Visit the app
2. Click "Continue as Guest"
3. Select a video
4. Click "Start Workout"
5. Allow camera access
6. Start walking/running on your treadmill!

### Create an Account
1. Click "Log In / Sign Up"
2. Switch to "Sign Up" tab
3. Enter your details
4. Start tracking your progress!

## 🛠️ Technology Stack

- **Frontend**: Vanilla JavaScript, HTML5, CSS3
- **Video**: YouTube IFrame API
- **AI/ML**: TensorFlow.js 4.11.0 + MediaPipe Face Mesh
- **Camera**: WebRTC getUserMedia API
- **Backend**: Firebase (Firestore, Auth, Analytics, Hosting)
- **Caching**: LocalStorage with TTL expiration

## 📱 Device Compatibility

### Desktop
- ✅ Chrome, Edge, Firefox (latest)
- ✅ Safari 14+
- ⚠️ Requires webcam for head tracking

### Mobile
- ✅ iPhone (iOS 14+) - Safari or Chrome
- ✅ Android (8+) - Chrome
- ⚠️ HTTPS required for camera access

### Tablet
- ✅ iPad (iPadOS 14+)
- ✅ Android tablets
- 💡 Recommended: mount in portrait mode on treadmill

## 💰 Pricing

**100% FREE!** No subscriptions, no ads, no tracking.

- Guest mode: Completely free, no sign-up
- Account mode: Free with workout history
- No credit card ever required

**Why free?**
- Firebase free tier covers small usage
- Optimized caching reduces costs
- Guest mode uses only local storage
- Open source philosophy

**Cost optimizations:**
- Smart caching (60-80% read reduction)
- Event batching (90% write reduction)  
- Offline persistence
- Estimated: $0/month for 0-5K users

### Installation

1. **Clone or download this repository**
   ```bash
   cd d:\src\virtualTrailRun
   ```

2. **Open in browser**
   - Simply open `index.html` in your web browser
   - OR use a local web server (recommended for testing):
   
   **Using Python:**
   ```bash
   python -m http.server 8000
   # Then open http://localhost:8000
   ```
   
   **Using Node.js (with http-server):**
   ```bash
   npx http-server -p 8000
   # Then open http://localhost:8000
   ```
   
   **Using VS Code:**
   - Install "Live Server" extension
   - Right-click on `index.html` and select "Open with Live Server"

3. **Allow camera permissions** when prompted by your browser

## 📱 Usage

1. **Choose Your Trail**: Click on one of the preset scenic video options
2. **Start Workout**: Click the "🎥 Start Workout" button to begin video playback
3. **Enable Camera**: Click "📹 Enable Camera" to activate head tracking
4. **Start Moving**: Begin walking or running on your treadmill
5. **Monitor Stats**: Watch your head movement stats update in real-time

### Controls
- **Fullscreen Video**: Click the fullscreen button to expand the video
- **Reset Stats**: Clear all workout statistics
- **Switch Videos**: Select different trail videos during your workout

## 🏗️ Technical Architecture

### Technology Stack

#### Frontend Framework
- **Vanilla JavaScript**: No framework dependencies for maximum compatibility
- **HTML5 Canvas**: For rendering face tracking overlay
- **CSS3**: Responsive design with CSS Grid and Flexbox

#### Key Libraries
- **YouTube IFrame API**: Video playback and control
- **TensorFlow.js**: Machine learning framework
- **MediaPipe Face Mesh**: High-fidelity face landmark detection (468 3D landmarks)
- **WebRTC**: Camera access via `getUserMedia` API

### File Structure
```
virtualTrailRun/
├── index.html          # Main HTML structure
├── styles.css          # All styling and responsive design
├── app.js              # Main application controller
├── videoPlayer.js      # YouTube player integration
├── headTracker.js      # Head tracking and face detection
└── README.md          # This file
```

### How It Works

#### Video Streaming
The app uses the YouTube IFrame Player API to embed videos directly in the page. The player supports:
- Full-screen playback on mobile devices
- Programmatic control (play, pause, seek)
- Event handling for playback state changes

#### Head Tracking
The head tracking system works in several steps:

1. **Camera Access**: Uses WebRTC `getUserMedia` API to access the front-facing camera
2. **Face Detection**: TensorFlow.js with MediaPipe Face Mesh detects facial landmarks
3. **Position Tracking**: Monitors the nose tip position (landmark #1) for vertical movement
4. **Bob Detection**: Identifies complete up-down or down-up motion cycles
5. **Statistics**: Calculates bobs per minute by tracking timestamps

**Key Tracking Metrics:**
- **Vertical Movement**: Real-time vertical displacement in pixels
- **Bob Count**: Total number of complete head bobbing cycles
- **Bobs Per Minute**: Intensity metric calculated from recent bob timestamps

## 🔧 Customization

### Adding New Videos

Edit the video selection buttons in `index.html`:

```html
<button class="video-option" data-video-id="YOUR_VIDEO_ID">
    🏔️ Your Video Title
</button>
```

Replace `YOUR_VIDEO_ID` with any YouTube video ID.

### Adjusting Tracking Sensitivity

In `headTracker.js`, modify these parameters:

```javascript
this.bobThreshold = 5;           // Minimum movement to count as a bob
this.maxHistoryLength = 30;      // Number of frames to track
```

### Styling

All styles are in `styles.css` with CSS custom properties for easy theming:

```css
:root {
    --primary-color: #2563eb;
    --secondary-color: #10b981;
    /* ... more variables ... */
}
```

## 📊 Browser Compatibility

| Feature | Chrome | Safari | Firefox | Edge |
|---------|--------|--------|---------|------|
| YouTube IFrame API | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| WebRTC Camera | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| TensorFlow.js | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| MediaPipe | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| Fullscreen API | ✅ | ⚠️* | ✅ | ✅ |

*Safari on iOS has some fullscreen limitations in web apps

### Mobile Testing
- **iOS Safari**: Works well, but requires user interaction before camera access
- **Android Chrome**: Full functionality with excellent performance
- **iPad/Tablet**: Optimal experience with larger screen

## ⚠️ Known Limitations

### Current POC Limitations
1. **Performance**: Running video + camera + ML simultaneously is resource-intensive
2. **Battery Drain**: Continuous camera use drains battery quickly
3. **Background Processing**: Mobile browsers limit background tasks
4. **Fullscreen + Camera**: Some browsers restrict camera access in fullscreen mode
5. **Accuracy**: Head tracking works best with good lighting and clear face visibility

### Web App vs Native App Trade-offs

**Web App Advantages:**
- ✅ No installation required
- ✅ Cross-platform (iOS, Android, Desktop)
- ✅ Easier updates
- ✅ Lower development cost

**Native App Advantages:**
- ✅ Better performance optimization
- ✅ More reliable camera access
- ✅ Background execution
- ✅ App store presence
- ✅ Offline capabilities
- ✅ Better battery management

## 🎓 Learning Resources

- [YouTube IFrame API Documentation](https://developers.google.com/youtube/iframe_api_reference)
- [TensorFlow.js Face Landmarks Detection](https://github.com/tensorflow/tfjs-models/tree/master/face-landmarks-detection)
- [MediaPipe Face Mesh](https://google.github.io/mediapipe/solutions/face_mesh.html)
- [WebRTC getUserMedia](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/MediaDevices/getUserMedia)

## 🚀 Next Steps

### For Development
1. **Test on actual devices**: Try the app on various phones and tablets
2. **Measure performance**: Use Chrome DevTools to profile CPU/memory usage
3. **User testing**: Get feedback from actual treadmill users
4. **Optimize tracking**: Fine-tune bob detection parameters

### Migration to Production
If this POC is successful, consider:

1. **Progressive Web App (PWA)**: Add service worker for offline support
2. **Capacitor/Cordova**: Wrap as native app if needed
3. **React Native**: For fully native performance with shared codebase
4. **Backend Integration**: Add user accounts, workout history, etc.

## 🤝 Contributing

This is a proof-of-concept project. Feel free to:
- Fork and experiment
- Report issues
- Suggest improvements
- Share your findings

## 📄 License

This is an educational proof-of-concept project. Use freely for learning and evaluation.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- YouTube for the IFrame API
- TensorFlow.js team for the ML framework
- Google MediaPipe for face detection models
- All the content creators whose trail videos make this possible

---

**Built with ❤️ as a technical feasibility study**

*Last Updated: December 30, 2025*
